"I HAVE KNOWN THE JOY AND
PAIN OF DEEP FRIENDSHIP
I HAVE SERVED
AND BEEN SERVED
I HAVE MADE SOME
GOOD ENEMIES
FOR WHICH I AM
NOT A BIT SORRY.
I HAVE LOVED UNSELFISHLY,
AND I HAVE FONDLED HATRED
WITH THE RED HOT
TONGS OF HELL -
THAT'S LIVING."
*
ZORA NEALE HURSTON WAS
BORN JANUARY 7TH, 1891,
THE FIFTH OF
EIGHT CHILDREN.
HER FATHER,
JOHN HURSTON,
WAS A CARPENTER AND
BAPTIST PREACHER;
HER MOTHER, LUCY
POTTS HURSTON,
A FORMER
SCHOOLTEACHER.
FROM ZORA'S EARLIEST
YEARS, SHE STOOD APART
FROM HER SIBLINGS
AND PEERS.
ONCE, UPON HEARING THAT
SHE WANTED A HORSE
FOR CHRISTMAS, HER
FATHER EXCLAIMED
"I DON'T KNOW HOW YOU GOT
IN THIS FAMILY NO HOW!"
AND ANGRILY
OFFERED THAT SHE
WASN'T LIKE THE
REST OF HIS CHILDREN.
ZORA WAS TOLD EARLY
IN HER LIFE IN WORDS
AND IN ACTION THAT SHE
WAS DIFFERENT FROM
OTHER FAMILY MEMBERS,
AND THAT HELPED TO
REINFORCE HER MAINTAINING
HER DIFFERENCE.
SHE WAS DIFFERENT THAN
HER OTHER SISTER, SARAH,
IN THAT SHE WAS NOT A GOOD
LITTLE, EYES TO THE FLOOR,
YES SIR, NO SIR, BLACK
DAUGHTER OF A SOUTHERN
MINISTER, THAT SHE
HAD NO PROBLEM DEFYING
WHAT WAS
EXPECTED OF HER.
SHE PLAYED ACROSS
GENDER TYPES IN THAT
SHE RAN WITH
HER BROTHERS.
THEY WERE RESPECTFULLY
SCARED OF HER BECAUSE
SHE COULD KEEP UP WITH
THEM AND THAT SHE WAS
NOT INTIMIDATED BY THEM,
AND THAT SHE DID NOT
HAVE A PROBLEM LIVING
OUTSIDE OF BEING A GIRL,
A SOUTHERN GIRL.
HER FATHER REMAINED
PERPLEXED BY
HIS YOUNGEST DAUGHTER
FOR ALL OF HIS LIFE.
JOHN HURSTON WAS PASTOR
OF THE ZION HOPE
BAPTIST CHURCH IN
EATONVILLE, FLORIDA,
WHERE HE'D EARNED
THE NICKNAME
"GOD'S BATTLE AXE"
FOR HIS BOOMING VOICE
AND GRAND GESTURES
FROM THE PULPIT.
HE WAS AN EXCELLENT
PROVIDER, BUT ALSO
AN UNREPENTANT
LADIES' MAN.
AND IT MAY HAVE BEEN HIS
INFIDELITIES THAT WOULD
SO INFLUENCE ZORA IN HER
OWN ADULT RELATIONSHIPS.
SHE NEVER UNDERSTOOD
HER MOTHER'S DEVOTION
TO THE MAN, AND
WOULD NEVER HERSELF
FORM A LASTING
RELATIONSHIP.
ZORA'S FATHER WAS CONSIDERED
QUITE THE WOMANIZER
AND I THINK THAT THE
MODEL THIS SET UP FOR ZORA
WAS THAT SHE WAS NOT
GOING TO POSITION HERSELF
TO BE HURT, THAT SHE
WAS NOT GOING TO BE
PEGGED INTO LIMITATIONS
ON RELATIONSHIPS,
AND THAT SHE COULD
FLOW WITH, MOVE WITH,
WHATEVER MADE
HER HAPPY.
SO IF AT SOME POINT
IN THE RELATIONSHIP
IT WASN'T WORKING,
SHE DIDN'T FEEL
THAT IT WAS HER
RESPONSIBILITY
TO BE A MARTYR AND
TO STICK WITH IT,
AND THAT IF IT WASN'T
PLEASING TO HER,
AND IF IT TRULY WAS NOT
SHOWING FORWARD PROGRESS,
THAT SHE HAD NO PROBLEM
RELEASING HERSELF FROM
THAT RELATIONSHIP AND
MOVING ON TO THE NEXT ONE.
EATONVILLE WAS AN
IDYLLIC TOWN FOR ITS DAY.
THICK GROVES OF ORANGE
AND GRAPEFRUIT TREES HUNG
HEAVY WITH FRUIT - NOT AN
UNUSUAL SIGHT IN FLORIDA,
BUT THE TOWN WAS UNIQUE
IN ONE IMPORTANT WAY:
IT WAS THE FIRST CHARTERED
ALL-NEGRO TOWN IN AMERICA,
FOUNDED BY BLACKS,
SETTLED BY BLACKS
AND GOVERNED BY BLACKS.
ZORA'S FATHER SERVED
THREE TERMS AS ITS MAYOR.
AND SO, SURROUNDED BY
PEOPLE WHO LOOKED LIKE HER
AND TALKED LIKE HER,
IN A TOWN FREE OF
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION,
ZORA GREW UP WITH A SENSE
OF SECURITY UNKNOWN TO
MOST AFRICAN-AMERICANS
IN THAT AGE OF JIM CROW
AND LYNCHINGS.
IT BECAME A TEMPLATE ON
HER ABOUT HOW NORMAL
SHE WAS, AND HOW ALL
THOSE THINGS THAT WERE
CULTURALLY BLACK
WERE JUST ROUTINE,
THEY WEREN'T JUXTAPOSED
AGAINST, OR COMPARED TO,
OR RANKED AGAINST THOSE
THINGS THAT WERE WHITE.
SO LIVING IN THAT
ENVIRONMENT SHE SAW
EVERYTHING AROUND HER THAT
REPRESENTED NORMAL LIFE
AND JUST HAPPENED
TO BE ALL BLACK.
THE GOOD THING ABOUT THAT
IS THAT YOU DO NOT HAVE
A DENTED OR DAMAGED PSYCHE
BY COMPARING IT TO,
OR BEING LESS THAN, OR BEING
SUBORDINATE OF THE BLACK
BACKSIDE OF A WHITE TOWN,
AND THAT EVERYTHING
YOU DO WINDS UP BEING
A SEPARATE BUT EQUAL,
SEPARATE BUT DIFFERENT,
SEPARATE BUT REALLY NOT
EQUAL RELATIONSHIP TO THOSE
THINGS THAT ARE WHITE.
THE NURTURING
ENVIRONMENT OF EATONVILLE
PROVIDED HER WITH
A SENSE OF SELF
THAT SERVED HER WELL
IN LATER YEARS.
"ONCE I FOUND THE
USE OF MY FEET,
THEY TOOK TO WANDERING.
I ALWAYS WANTED TO GO.
I WOULD WANDER OFF
IN THE WOODS ALL ALONE,
FOLLOWING SOME INSIDE
URGE TO GO PLACES.
THIS ALARMED MY
MOTHER A GREAT DEAL.
SHE USED TO SAY THAT SHE
BELIEVED A WOMAN WHO WAS
AN ENEMY OF HERS HAD
SPRINKLED "TRAVEL DUST"
AROUND THE DOORSTEP
THE DAY I WAS BORN.
THAT WAS THE ONLY
EXPLANATION SHE COULD FIND."
ZORA WAS ACCEPTED TO
HOWARD UNIVERSITY IN 1919,
AND IT WAS THERE THAT
HER TALENTS AS A WRITER
WERE FIRST RECOGNIZED.
HER SHORT STORY "JOHN
REDDING GOES TO SEA"
WAS PUBLISHED IN 1921
IN 'THE STYLUS',
THE CAMPUS LITERARY
SOCIETY'S MAGAZINE.
BUT RECOGNITION
CAME FROM NOT JUST
THE HOWARD
UNIVERSITY LITERATI.
ALAIN LOCKE WAS
A HARVARD PH.D.
AND THE FIRST BLACK
MAN EVER TO ATTEND
OXFORD UNIVERSITY ON
A RHODES SCHOLARSHIP.
IN THE 1920'S HE DIVIDED
HIS TIME BETWEEN TEACHING
DUTIES AT HOWARD AND A
BUSY LIFE IN HARLEM
WHERE HE SERVED AS
A SORT OF UNOFFICIAL
"PRESS AGENT" FOR THE
EMERGING LITERARY SCENE.
HE COUNTED LANGSTON HUGHES
AND POET COUNTEE CULLEN
AMONG HIS FRIENDS,
AND WHEN HE READ
"JOHN REDDING GOES
TO SEA" IN 1924,
LOCKE BECAME A FAN
OF HURSTON AS WELL.
HE RECOMMENDED
ZORA'S WORK
TO PUBLISHER
CHARLES S. JOHNSON.
THE PREVIOUS YEAR
JOHNSON HAD LAUNCHED
THE PERIODICAL "OPPORTUNITY:
A JOURNAL OF NEGRO LIFE"
AND IN ITS DECEMBER 1924
ISSUE READERS FOUND
"DRENCHED IN LIGHT",
THE WORK THAT PLACED
ZORA NEALE HURSTON'S
NAME AND HER TALENT
FIRMLY IN THE
NATIONAL SPOTLIGHT.
MORE IMPORTANTLY,
IN ZORA'S MIND,
SHE WAS NOW A WRITER.
IN JANUARY 1925, AT
THE URGING OF JOHNSON,
HURSTON MOVED
TO NEW YORK CITY.
HARLEM SOON
FELT LIKE HOME.
MUCH LIKE THE EATONVILLE
OF HER YOUTH, THE HARLEM
OF THE 1920'S WAS A PLACE
WHERE AFRICAN-AMERICANS
COULD CELEBRATE AND REVEL
IN THEIR OWN CULTURE.
THE NEXT YEAR SHE
ENTERED FOUR WORKS
IN A LITERARY CONTEST
SPONSORED BY "OPPORTUNITY".
THERE RE MORE THAN
SEVEN HUNDRED SUBMISSIONS;
HUGHES WAS REPRESENTED,
SO WAS CULLEN.
BUT WHEN THE AWARDS WERE
GIVEN OUT AT A GALA EVENT
ON MAY 1ST 1926, ZORA
HURSTON TOOK HOME
MORE PRIZES THAN ANYONE
ELSE: SECOND PLACE IN THE
FICTION CATEGORY FOR
HER SHORT STORY "SPUNK",
SECOND AMONG THE DRAMA
ENTRIES FOR "COLOR STRUCK",
AND HONORABLE MENTION
FOR HER PLAY "SPEARS",
AND HER SHORT
STORY "BLACK DEATH".
HERS WAS A FRESH, NEW VOICE
ADDRESSING TIMELESS TOPICS.
THE GREAT THEMES OF
THE NOVEL, AS SCHOLARS
HAVE SAID FOR YEARS,
ARE LOVE AND DEATH.
HURSTON WRITES ABOUT
LOVE AND DEATH,
THAT'S WHAT
SHE WRITES ABOUT.
THE TWO FUNDAMENTAL CONCERNS
OF BEING A HUMAN BEING.
NOT DEATH FROM THE
LYNCH MOB, BUT DEATH...
JUST FACING THE ABYSS.
HOW DO YOU KNOW
WHO YOU LOVE?
PEOPLE FALLING IN
AND OUT OF LOVE.
SHE WRITES ABOUT PASSION,
SHE WRITES ABOUT
THE ABSENCE OF PASSION
METAPHORICALLY:
"THE SPIRIT OF THE
BEDROOM GOT UP
AND MOVED TO
THE PARLOR."
I MEAN, WHAT A BEAUTIFUL
WAY TO TALK ABOUT
THAT MOMENT IN
A RELATIONSHIP
WHEN PASSION DISAPPEARS.
WE HADN'T SEEN THAT
IN AFRICAN-AMERICAN
LITERATURE BEFORE.
SO IMPRESSIVE WAS HER
WORK THAT BARNARD COLLEGE
FOUNDER AND BENEFACTOR
ANNIE NATHAN MEYER,
ATTENDING THE AWARDS
BANQUET, OFFERED HER
A CHANCE TO ENROLL
AT THE COLLEGE.
ZORA COULD NOT HAVE CHOSEN
A BETTER HOME THAN HARLEM
NOR A BETTER
TIME TO BE THERE.
THE NEW NEGRO MOVEMENT HAD
BEGUN, FUELED BY A MASSIVE
MIGRATION OF SOUTHERN
BLACKS TO THE NORTH.
BLACK LITERATURE, ART,
AND MUSIC FLOURISHED.
THIS MAGICAL PERIOD SOON
CAME TO BE KNOWN AS THE
HARLEM RENAISSANCE, AND IT
USHERED IN ONE OF THE MOST
EXCITING TIMES IN THE
HISTORY OF AMERICAN CULTURE.
HURSTON SOON FOUND HERSELF
WORKING AND PLAYING AMONG
SOME OF THE BRIGHTEST
LIGHTS IN BLACK LITERATURE
- LANGSTON HUGHES, COUNTEE
CULLEN, AND ALAIN LOCKE.
STARS OF STAGE, SCREEN
AND SONG AS WELL -
PAUL ROBESON, BESSIE SMITH,
LOUIS ARMSTRONG
AND ETHEL WATERS -
TO NAME JUST A FEW.
IN THE 1920'S HARLEM WAS
THE PLACE TO SEE AND BE SEEN.
FOR BLACKS, IT
WAS A UNIQUE SPOT
CENTER-STAGE IN A NEW
AGE OF AMERICAN CULTURE,
AND FOR WHITES
WHO REGULARLY
MADE THE TREK UPTOWN,
IT WAS A PLAYGROUND.
NOTABLES SUCH AS CHARLIE
CHAPLIN, WILLIAM FAULKNER,
TALLULAH BANKHEAD,
JIMMY DURANTE,
AND GEORGE GERSHWIN
FREQUENTED ITS CLUB SCENE.
ALL WERE DRAWN BY HARLEM'S
GROWING REPUTATION AS A
PLACE WHERE THE JAZZ WAS
HOT, A REEFER WAS "COOL",
AND THE BEHAVIOR
WAS UNINHIBITED.
THOUGH STILL FINDING
HER VOICE AS A WRITER,
ZORA HAD ALREADY SHOWN
A REMARKABLE ABILITY
TO OBSERVE, TO ABSORB,
TO STUDY THE VERY REAL
CHARACTERS WHO SURROUNDED
HER, AND TO TRANSFORM THEM
INTO BELIEVABLE FICTIONAL
CHARACTERS ON THE PAGE.
IT WAS ONLY NATURAL THAT,
WHEN SHE ENROLLED IN
BARNARD COLLEGE IN 1925,
THESE INTERESTS AND
TALENTS GUIDED HER TOWARD
THE STUDY OF ANTHROPOLOGY.
BARNARD WAS THE SISTER
COLLEGE OF NEW YORK'S
PRESTIGIOUS COLUMBIA
UNIVERSITY, AND IT WAS
AT COLUMBIA THAT
THE GERMAN EMIGRE,
FRANZ BOAS, HAD
ESTABLISHED THE VERY FIRST
DEPARTMENT OF
ANTHROPOLOGY IN THE U.S.
EVERYTHING THAT SHE DID
THROUGHOUT HER LIFE
WAS PRETTY MUCH SHAPED BY
THE FACT THAT SHE WAS
AN ANTHROPOLOGIST.
AND YOU CAN FIND
THREADS OF THAT CLEARLY
AND BROADLY IN THE
NOVELS AND FOLKTALES
AND SHORT STORIES AND
COLLECTIONS THAT SHE DID.
I THINK ZORA WAS ALMOST
BORN AN ANTHROPOLOGIST
AND HAD TO FIND HER WAY
AS A SOCIAL SCIENTIST
AND REALIZED THAT
IS WHAT SHE WAS
AND THEN SHE
TRAINED IN IT.
BUT SHE ALWAYS HAD AN
UNCANNY NATURE TO JUST
BE AN OBSERVER, TO
STAND BACK AND WATCH
SOCIAL LIFE HAPPEN AROUND
HER IN SMALL GROUPS.
IN 1926 ZORA BEGAN DOING
FIELD WORK FOR FRANZ BOAS
IN HARLEM.
BOAS'S WORK INVOLVED
THE STUDY OF HUMAN BODY
MEASUREMENTS FOR ITS
USE IN ANTHROPOLOGICAL
CLASSIFICATION
AND COMPARISON -
A FIELD KNOWN
AS "ANTHROPOMETRY".
ZORA THOUGHT
NOTHING OF STOPPING
COMPLETE STRANGERS ON
THE STREETS OF HARLEM
AND MEASURING THEIR
SKULLS FOR HER RESEARCH.
AND ALL THIS TIME SHE
WAS STUDYING, OBSERVING,
SHE WAS WRITING.
BEFORE THE 1920'S,
AFRICAN-AMERICAN ARTISTS
WERE EXPECTED TO CREATE
WORKS THAT MADE NOT JUST
AN ARTISTIC STATEMENT,
BUT A SOCIAL AND POLITICAL
ONE AS WELL, WORKS THAT
WOULD LIFT UP THE RACE
BY DEPICTING BLACKS
WHO SPOKE PROPERLY,
WHO BEHAVED PROPERLY,
WHO WERE EDUCATED.
PERHAPS NO ONE PROMOTED
THIS NARROW VIEW
OF ARTISTIC LICENSE
MORE THAN W.E.B. DUBOIS,
WHO BLUNTLY STATED
"I DO NOT CARE A DAMN
FOR ANY ART THAT IS NOT
USED FOR PROPAGANDA".
THE WRITERS OF THE HARLEM
RENAISSANCE REJECTED THIS
EARLY VERSION OF WHAT
TODAY MIGHT BE CALLED
"POLITICAL CORRECTNESS",
AND IN THE SUMMER OF 1926,
HURSTON, LANGSTON HUGHES,
WALLACE THURMAN AND OTHERS
RESPONDED WITH A NEW
PUBLICATION THAT REFLECTED
WHAT THEY BELIEVED BLACK
LITERARY ART SHOULD BE.
THEY CALLED IT "FIRE!",
AND IT BRIMMED AND BURNED
WITH WORKS INTENDED,
IN HUGHES' WORDS,
TO "CAUSE THE SMUG NEGRO
MIDDLE CLASS TO TURN FROM
THEIR WHITE, RESPECTABLE,
ORDINARY BOOKS AND PAPERS
TO CATCH A GLIMMER
OF THEIR OWN BEAUTY".
IT WAS A BOLD STATEMENT
OF ARTISTIC INTENT -
PERHAPS TOO MUCH SO,
EVEN FOR THAT BOLD TIME.
THEY PUBLISHED ONLY ONE
ISSUE, IN NOVEMBER 1926.
THE FOLLOWING FEBRUARY,
THROUGH THE EFFORTS
OF FRANZ BOAS, HURSTON
RECEIVED A FELLOWSHIP
GRANT TO COLLECT NEGRO
FOLKLORE IN THE SOUTH.
HER JOURNEYS THROUGH A LAND
WHERE LYNCHING WAS COMMON
AND RACISM RAMPANT,
SERVED TO SHOW HER
JUST HOW UNCOMMON HER
UPBRINGING HAD BEEN
IN THE IDYLLIC
ALL-BLACK EATONVILLE.
FOR A TIME SHE TRAVELED
WITH LANGSTON HUGHES,
WHOM SHE HAD RUN INTO BY
CHANCE IN MOBILE, ALABAMA.
ALONG THE WAY SHE
COLLECTED A TREASURE TROVE
OF STORIES, FOLK TALES,
AND SONGS SUNG BY SLAVES
AND THEIR DESCENDENTS
IN THE AMERICAN SOUTH.
* MAMA DON'T WANT NO PEAS,
NO RICE, NO COCONUT OIL
NO COCONUT OIL. MAMA DON'T
WANT NO PEAS, NO RICE,
NO COCONUT OIL,
NO COCONUT OIL.
MAMA DON'T WANT NO PEAS,
NO RICE, NO COCONUT OIL...
ALL SHE WANT IS WHISKEY
BRANDY ALL THE TIME. *
SHE SPENT SIX MONTHS
ON THE EXPEDITION
WITH ONE MAJOR DIVERSION
TO ST. AUGUSTINE, FLORIDA
IN MAY OF THAT YEAR TO
MARRY HERBERT SHEEN,
AN OLD BOYFRIEND FROM HER
HOWARD UNIVERSITY DAYS.
SHEEN RETURNED TO RUSH
MEDICAL COLLEGE IN CHICAGO
WHILE HURSTON PURSUED
HER OWN INTERESTS
BOTH IN NEW YORK AND
"IN THE FIELD" AND SO
PERHAPS THE MARRIAGE WAS
DOOMED FROM THE START.
THEY BROKE OFF RELATIONS
THE FOLLOWING JANUARY,
THOUGH THE COUPLE
REMAINED MARRIED
FOR THREE MORE YEARS.
SUBSEQUENT TRIPS SOUTH
TO COLLECT FOLKLORE
WERE SUBSIDIZED BY A
WEALTHY WHITE PATRON,
MRS. RUFUS OSGOOD MASON.
LANGSTON HUGHES
HAD INTRODUCED THEM
TO ONE ANOTHER.
IN 1930, HURSTON BEGAN
ORGANIZING THE FIELD NOTES
THAT WOULD EVENTUALLY
BECOME HER HIGHLY-PRAISED
"MULES AND MEN".
IN NEW ORLEANS, HURSTON
BECAME FASCINATED
WITH THE PRACTICE
OF HOODOO.
KNOWN VARIOUSLY AS
"VOODOO", "CONJURE"
AND "OBEAH", HOODOO HAS
ITS ROOTS IN AFRICA,
BUT IT FLOWERED
IN THE NEW WORLD,
A MELDING OF AGE-OLD
SPIRIT WORSHIP,
AND CATHOLICISM'S
PANTHEON OF SAINTS.
SHE IMMERSED HERSELF IN
ITS STUDY, APPRENTICING
WITH SOME OF NEW ORLEANS'
MOST REVERED AND FEARED
"HOODOO DOCTORS,"
AND EVEN ENDURING
SOMETIMES-FRIGHTENING
INITIATION RITES.
"ON THE SECOND DAY I
BEGAN TO DREAM STRANGE,
EXALTED DREAMS.
ON THE THIRD NIGHT I HAD
DREAMS THAT SEEMED REAL
FOR WEEKS.
IN ONE, I STRODE
ACROSS THE HEAVENS
WITH LIGHTNING
FLASHING UNDER MY FEET,
AND GRUMBLING THUNDER
FOLLOWING IN MY WAKE."
SHE PUBLISHED MUCH OF
HER RESEARCH IN THE
JOURNAL OF
AMERICAN FOLKLORE
AS "HOODOO IN
AMERICA" IN 1931.
HER INTEREST AND
INVOLVEMENT IN HOODOO
WENT BEYOND THE
MERELY ACADEMIC.
SHE FULLY BELIEVED
IN ITS POWER,
AND WAS ABSORBED
IN ITS MYSTERY.
HOODOO WOULD REMAIN A
LIFE-LONG FASCINATION AND,
IN THE YEARS TO COME, HER
STUDIES OF ITS PRACTICE
WOULD TAKE HER ACROSS
THE AMERICAN SOUTH
AND TO THE CARIBBEAN.
1931 WITNESSED CHANGES IN
TWO OF ZORA NEALE HURSTON'S
MOST SIGNIFICANT
RELATIONSHIPS.
SHE FINALLY DIVORCED
HERBERT SHEEN WHO HAD
MET ANOTHER WOMAN AND
WANTED TO RE-MARRY.
THE TWO HAD BEEN LIVING
APART FOR SOME THREE YEARS
BUT HURSTON WOULD PROFESS
TO HIM YEARS LATER
THAT SHE STILL
LOVED HIM DEEPLY.
MORE SIGNIFICANT
WAS HURSTON'S BREAK
WITH LANGSTON HUGHES.
IN 1930, THE TWO BEGAN
COLLABORATING ON A PLAY
BASED ON ZORA'S SHORT STORY
"THE BONE OF CONTENTION".
THE PLAY
WAS ENTITLED
"MULE BONE: A
COMEDY OF NEGRO LIFE"
AND WAS INTENDED TO
COUNTER THE SORT OF
GRIM PORTRAIT OF
AFRICAN-AMERICAN LIFE
SO PREVALENT
IN ITS DAY.
ODDLY FOR TWO SUCH
DISTINCTIVE WRITERS,
IT WAS NOT ARTISTIC
DIFFERENCES THAT
FOMENTED THE RIFT,
BUT FINANCIAL ONES.
HUGHES PROPOSED SPLITTING
PROFITS OF THE PLAY WITH
THEIR TYPIST - NEITHER
HUGHES NOR HURSTON
COULD AFFORD TO PAY
THE WOMAN IN CASH -
AND WHAT STARTED AS
A PETTY DISAGREEMENT
SOON GREW INTO A
FIRST-RATE ROW.
IN FEBRUARY 1931, HURSTON
ABANDONED THE PLAY AND
HEADED SOUTH ONCE MORE
TO CONTINUE COLLECTING
FOLKLORE FOR
"MULES AND MEN".
IN 1932, WITH THE
DEPRESSION TAKING
ITS AWFUL TOLL AND
JOBS AND MONEY SCARCE,
HURSTON FOUND HERSELF
BACK IN EATONVILLE.
SHE HAD FINALLY BROKEN
HER TIES WITH THE
WEALTHY PATRON SHE
CALLED "GODMOTHER".
MRS. RUFUS OSGOOD
MASON HAD BECOME
AS MUCH HINDRANCE AS HELP,
INSISTING ON GUIDING
HURSTON'S DEVELOPMENT
IN THE DIRECTION
SHE THOUGHT A BLACK
WRITER'S PATH SHOULD TAKE.
NOW, FREE OF ANY FINANCIAL
OBLIGATION TO MASON,
HURSTON FELT A NEW
SENSE OF INDEPENDENCE
THAT FED HER
CREATIVITY.
AFTER "THE GILDED SIX
BITS" WAS PUBLISHED
IN THE LITERARY
MAGAZINE "STORY",
HURSTON RECEIVED LETTERS
FROM FOUR PUBLISHERS,
INCLUDING BERTRAM
LIPPINCOTT
OF THE J.B.
LIPPINCOTT COMPANY,
ALL EAGER TO READ ANY
LONGER WORKS OF FICTION
SHE MIGHT
HAVE TO OFFER.
SHE ANSWERED WITH A WHITE
LIE, TELLING LIPPINCOTT
THAT SHE WAS WRITING A
NOVEL, AND A WEEK LATER
SHE BEGAN WORK ON
"JONAH'S GOURD VINE".
"WHAT I WANTED TO TELL
WAS A STORY ABOUT A MAN,
AND FROM WHAT I HAD READ
AND HEARD, NEGROES WERE
SUPPOSED TO WRITE
ABOUT THE RACE PROBLEM.
I WAS AND AM THOROUGHLY
SICK OF THE SUBJECT.
MY INTEREST LIES IN WHAT
MAKES A MAN OR A WOMAN
DO SUCH AND SO,
REGARDLESS OF HIS COLOR."
A FICTIONALIZED ACCOUNT
OF HER FATHER'S LIFE,
THE BOOK CAME TOGETHER IN
JUST THREE MONTHS, AND
REPRESENTED TWO MILESTONES
IN HURSTON'S LIFE.
IT ALLOWED HER TO
FINALLY WORK THROUGH
THE TANGLE OF
FEELINGS THAT SHE HAD
FOR HER POWERFUL,
PHILANDERING FATHER,
AND WITH ITS ACCEPTANCE
FOR PUBLICATION BY THE
LIPPINCOTT COMPANY,
IT MADE HURSTON
A RARE ENTITY IN
DEPRESSION ERA AMERICA:
A BLACK, FEMALE
PUBLISHED NOVELIST.
IN MARCH 1936,
HURSTON WAS AWARDED
A PRESTIGIOUS
GUGGENHEIM FELLOWSHIP
TO STUDY WEST INDIAN
OBEAH PRACTICES.
THAT YEAR HER STUDIES
TOOK HER TO JAMAICA,
THEN TO HAITI THE
FOLLOWING YEAR.
IT WAS WHILE ENGAGED IN HER
FIELD WORK IN HAITI THAT
HURSTON WROTE WHAT WOULD
BE HER MOST-LOVED WORK,
"THEIR EYES WERE
WATCHING GOD".
IT CAME TOGETHER AT A
FEVER PITCH, TAKING JUST
SEVEN WEEKS TO COMPLETE,
HER WRITING SHARING TIME
WITH HER
ANTHROPOLOGICAL STUDIES.
"THEIR EYES WERE
WATCHING GOD"
WAS PUBLISHED ON
SEPTEMBER 18TH, 1936.
"SHIPS AT A DISTANCE HAVE
EVERY MAN'S WISH ON BOARD.
FOR SOME THEY COME
IN WITH THE TIDE.
FOR OTHERS THEY SAIL
FOREVER ON THE HORIZON,
NEVER OUT OF SIGHT,
NEVER LANDING UNTIL
THE WATCHER TURNS HIS
EYES AWAY IN RESIGNATION,
HIS DREAMS MOCKED
TO DEATH BY TIME.
THAT IS THE LIFE OF MEN."
TODAY, ITS PUBLICATION IS
SEEN AS A WATERSHED MOMENT
IN AFRICAN-AMERICAN
LETTERS.
ITS LEAD
CHARACTER, JANIE,
OF A TYPE UNSEEN,
PERHAPS EVEN UNIMAGINED,
IN ANYTHING THAT
HAD COME BEFORE.
IF YOU READ AFRICAN-AMERICAN
LITERATURE UP TO THIS TIME
YOU DON'T THINK BLACK
PEOPLE EVER MADE LOVE.
THEY DIDN'T
KISS EACH OTHER.
TOO BUSY THINKING ABOUT
THE WHITE MAN AND ABOUT
RACISM AND HOW OUR
PEOPLE CAN SUCCEED.
AND THERE WERE LOTS OF
REASONS FOR THAT, OF COURSE.
SO, THE BOOK WAS
CONTROVERSIAL BECAUSE
OF ITS DEPICTION OF
JANIE'S INDEPENDENCE
AND HER SENSUALITY,
HER SEXUALITY,
AND HER WILL TO
SELF-DETERMINATION.
AND HER CAPACITY TO
DETERMINE HER SELF.
GROUNDBREAKING IN
ITS TIME, IT IS THIS
CAPACITY IN ZORA
NEALE HURSTON'S WORK
THAT MAKES IT RESONATE
SO PROFOUNDLY TODAY.
THE ULTIMATE CLAIM TO
SELFHOOD FOR THE AFRICAN
AMERICAN PEOPLE WAS MADE
BY ZORA NEALE HURSTON
IN "THEIR EYES WERE
WATCHING GOD".
WE HAVE A WORLD INDEPENDENT
OF THE WHITE WORLD.
MANY TIMES IN
BLACK LITERATURE,
THE WHITE WORLD,
ONE MIGHT SAY,
BECOMES THE
PROTAGONIST.
THE WHITE MAN, THE MAN,
RACISM, OPPRESSION -
THAT'S WHAT THE
BOOK IS ABOUT.
AND THEN ABOUT HOW SOME
SENSITIVE MAN OVERCOMES,
OR IS CRUSHED BY - IN THE
CASE OF BIGGER THOMAS
IN RICHARD WRIGHT'S
"NATIVE SON"
PUBLISHED JUST
THREE YEARS LATER.
THAT'S THE DOMINANT PLOT.
HURSTON WAS
"FORGET ALL THAT.
HOW DO WE MAKE LOVE, HOW
DO WE LOVE EACH OTHER,
HOW DO WE ABUSE EACH OTHER,
HOW DO WE VIOLATE
EACH OTHER, HOW DO
WE NEED TO CHANGE?
HOW DO WE
CELEBRATE CULTURE?
HOW DO WE MAKE CULTURE?
WHAT IS OUR
CULTURAL ETHOS?
WHAT MAKES US KEEP
ON KEEPING ON?
WHAT MAKES US
GET OUT OF BED?
HOW DO WE TRIUMPH
OVER DESPAIR?
OVER EXISTENTIAL ANXIETY?
OVER ANGST?
OVER THE OPPRESSION
CREATED BY ECONOMIC
EXPLOITATION OR
ANTI-BLACK RACISM?"
IT MAY SEEM BAFFLING TO US
TODAY, BUT AS FRESH AND AS
HONEST AS HER WORK WAS
FOR ITS TIME, IT WAS NOT
THE STORY THAT SHE TOLD
THAT CAUSED CONTROVERSY.
RATHER, IT WAS THE
WAY SHE TOLD IT.
IT WAS AN ATTEMPT
TO INCORPORATE THE
BLACK VERNACULAR INTO
STANDARD LITERARY IDIOM.
IT WAS AN ATTEMPT TO
INCORPORATE THE AFRICAN
AMERICAN VERNACULAR INTO
THE LANGUAGE THAT IS
APPROPRIATE TO USE TO TELL
THE TALE OF THE NOVEL.
IN OTHER WORDS, SHE
WANTED TO PROVE THAT BLACK
DIALECT HAD THE STUFF -
HAD THE ENERGY, HAD THE
RESILIENCE, HAD THE
RESONANCE, THE CAPACITY -
TO CARRY A TALE OVER A
COUPLE HUNDRED PAGES.
BUT IT WAS ALSO
CONTROVERSIAL BECAUSE OF
ITS USE OF DIALECT - IT'S
RECUPERATION OF DIALECT -
AND RICHARD WRIGHT FELT
THAT HURSTON WAS DONNING
A MINSTREL MASK FOR WHITE
PATRONS, SHOWING THE
DARKIES IN THE FIELD, UM,
PEOPLE DOWN ON THE MUCK
PLAYING THE BANJO AND
CUTTING UP AND PLAYING THE
DOZENS AND SIGNIFYING AND
INSULTING EACH OTHER IN
THE RITUAL WAYS PECULIAR TO
AFRICAN-AMERICAN CULTURE.
OTHER WRITERS OR
CONTEMPORARIES OF THE TIME
DISAGREED WITH HER USE
OF BLACK VERNACULAR.
SHE DIDN'T SEE ANYTHING
WRONG OR PANDERING
IN HER APPROACH TO USING
THE BLACK VERNACULAR,
AND SHE WANTED TO
EXPOSE THE BEAUTY
OF THOSE CULTURAL
ELEMENTS,
LANGUAGE BEING ONE OF THEM
- ONE OF THE MAJOR ONES.
SHE WANTED TO BROADEN
THE EXPOSURE OF THOSE
CULTURAL ELEMENTS FROM
THE BLACK COMMUNITY
TO A WHITE
AUDIENCE TO ALMOST
INCREASE THEIR HUMANITY
AND BROADEN THEIR
UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT
BLACK CULTURE WAS ABOUT.
IN THE HARLEM OF THE
1920'S, BLACK DIALECT
OR BLACK VERNACULAR
ENGLISH WAS CONSIDERED
BY MANY TO BE
AN EMBARRASSMENT.
IT WAS THE LANGUAGE
OF STEREOTYPE,
THE LANGUAGE OF
VAUDEVILLE,
AND OF A TYPE OF
"BLACK DIALECT POETRY"
THAT WAS POPULAR
AT THE TIME.
MANY AFRICAN AMERICANS
FOUND ITS USE DEMEANING.
WHAT WAS THE EFFECT OF HER
USE OF THE BLACK VERNACULAR?
IT WAS THIS: THE NOVEL STARTS
OFF IN STANDARD ENGLISH:
"SHIPS AT A DISTANCE HAVE
EVERY MAN'S WISH ON BOARD".
ANYONE COULD HAVE WRITTEN
THAT SENTENCE IN THE 1930'S.
WITHIN A FEW PARAGRAPHS
THERE'S THE UNMEDIATED
VOICE OF THE AFRICAN
AMERICAN COMMUNITY.
BLACK DIALECT.
"WHAT'S SHE DOING
COMING BACK HERE
WEARING THEM OVERALLS?
SHE AIN'T NO
YOUNG GAL NO MORE.
WHERE'S THAT YOUNG
MAN SHE RAN OFF WITH?"
"WHERE HE LEFT HER?
WHAT HE DONE WID
ALL HER MONEY?
BETCHA HE BE OFF WID
SOME GAL SO YOUNG
SHE AIN'T EVEN
GOT NO HAIRS.
WHY SHE DON'T
STAY IN HER CLASS?
WHEN SHE GOT TO WHERE THEY
WASE SHE TURNED HER FACE
ON THE BANDER
LOG AND SPOKE.
THEY SCRAMBLED A
NOISY 'GOOD EVENIN'
AND LEFT THEIR
MOUTHS SETTING OPEN
AND THEIR EARS
FULL OF HOPE."
YOU KNOW, IT'S THE
GREEK CHORUS EQUIVALENT.
IT'S THE VOICE OF
THE AFRICAN AMERICAN
COMMUNITY, ANONYMOUS
AND COLLECTIVE,
UNDIFFERENTIATED IN THE
TEXT, JUST A BUNCH OF
SENTENCES AND QUESTIONS
RUNNING TOGETHER.
THOSE ARE THE LINGUISTIC
EXTREMES OF THE NOVEL
ESTABLISHED IN
THE FIRST CHAPTER
IN THE FIRST FOUR
OR FIVE PARAGRAPHS.
STANDARD ENGLISH
AT ONE EXTREME,
BLACK VERNACULAR ENGLISH
AT THE OTHER EXTREME.
A CURIOUS THING HAPPENS.
THOSE TWO VOICES
MERGE IN A COMBINED
STANDARD ENGLISH/BLACK
VERNACULAR
DISCURSIVE VOICE
THROUGH THE VOICE
OF THE NARRATOR AS
THE TEXT GOES ALONG.
THE ACHIEVEMENT OF
PRODUCING A THIRD TERM,
ONE HALF WAY BETWEEN
STANDARD ENGLISH
AND THE BLACK
VERNACULAR.
ZORA NEALE HURSTON WAS
A GENIUS TO BE ABLE TO
ACHIEVE THAT EFFECT.
MANY OF HURSTON'S
CONTEMPORARIES
- RICHARD WRIGHT
IN PARTICULAR -
WERE GREATLY DISPLEASED
WITH HER WORK.
BUT HURSTON HAD COME
FROM A PLACE WHERE
ALL FACETS OF BLACK
CULTURE WERE CELEBRATED.
SHE WAS COMFORTABLE
IN HER SKIN.
THAT WAS ONE OF THE
MAJOR DIFFERENCES
BETWEEN RICHARD WRIGHT
AND ZORA NEALE HURSTON.
ZORA GROWING UP FEELING
VERY COMFORTABLE IN HER
BLACKNESS, HAD NO SHAME IN
SHARING THAT AND SHOUTING
THAT FROM THE MOUNTAIN TOP
SO TO SPEAK, AND DIDN'T
SEE IT AS SOMETHING THAT
WAS A DISADVANTAGE TO HER
BY NOT EMBRACING THOSE
THINGS THAT REPRESENTED
WHITE AND PRIVILEGE
AND POWER AROUND HER.
I THINK THAT SPEAKS
TO THE DIFFERENCE IN
SOCIALIZATION BETWEEN
BEING RAISED IN AN
ALL-BLACK TOWN AND
WALLOWING IN THAT BLACKNESS
AND FEELING VERY
COMFORTABLE AND
APPRECIATIVE ALMOST OF IT
VERSUS BEING RAISED
IN A BLACK BACKSIDE OF A
TOWN WHERE YOU GET BEAT UP
BY THE FACT THAT
YOU ARE NOT WHITE.
IN THE SUCCEEDING YEARS,
HURSTON'S WORK ALTERNATED
BETWEEN HER LITERARY
PURSUITS AND HER
ANTHROPOLOGICAL
FIELD STUDIES.
SHE WAS HIRED AS A
DRAMA INSTRUCTOR AT THE
NORTH CAROLINA COLLEGE
FOR NEGROES IN DURHAM,
AND SPENT TIME IN SOUTH
CAROLINA COLLECTING
NEGRO FOLKLORE,
WRITING ALL THE WHILE.
OVER THE SUMMER OF 1941
HURSTON COMPLETED
HER AUTOBIOGRAPHY,
"DUST TRACKS ON A ROAD".
PUBLISHED THE FOLLOWING
YEAR, IT WAS AWARDED THE
ANISFIELD-WOLF BOOK
AWARD IN RACE RELATIONS,
AND HURSTON WAS
HONORED ON THE COVER
OF THE SATURDAY REVIEW.
SHE SPENT NEARLY A YEAR
IN BRITISH HONDURAS
RESEARCHING THE
BLACK COMMUNITIES
OF CENTRAL AMERICA.
IT WAS DURING THIS
TIME THAT SHE WROTE
WHAT WOULD BE HER LAST
MAJOR PUBLISHED WORK,
"SERAPH ON THE SUWANEE".
IN MARCH OF 1948
ZORA RETURNED TO
THE UNITED STATES.
AND IN SEPTEMBER OF THAT
YEAR BEGAN ONE OF THE MOST
BIZARRE AND UNFORTUNATE
EVENTS IN ZORA'S LIFE.
A FORMER LANDLADY ACCUSED
HURSTON OF MOLESTING
THE WOMAN'S
10-YEAR-OLD SON,
ALONG WITH TWO OTHER
NEIGHBORHOOD CHILDREN.
HURSTON WAS TAKEN TO
THE POLICE STATION,
FINGERPRINTED AND
BOOKED ON CHARGES
OF SEXUALLY ABUSING
THE THREE BOYS.
THE ACCUSATIONS
WERE GROUNDLESS.
HURSTON COULD PROVE
SHE WAS IN HONDURAS
WHEN THE CRIME HAD
ALLEGEDLY TAKEN PLACE.
ALL CHARGES WERE
EVENTUALLY DROPPED
WHEN THE BOYS ADMITTED
THE STORY WAS FABRICATED.
BUT IN AN ATMOSPHERE
SIMILAR TO TODAY'S
MEDIA CIRCUS
SURROUNDING CELEBRITIES,
THE "AFRO-AMERICAN", A
NATIONAL NEWSPAPER BASED
IN BALTIMORE, VICIOUSLY
HEADLINED THE STORY.
THE CONSERVATIVE PAPER
EVEN QUOTED DIALOGUE
FROM ZORA'S FICTION TO
IMPLY HER GUILT IN FACT.
THE FALSE ACCUSATIONS
LEVELED AGAINST ZORA
WERE QUITE
DEVASTATING TO HER.
SHE WAS CRUSHED BY THE
FACT THAT IT WAS THE
BLACK PRESS THAT
GRABBED THE STORY,
REALLY WANTED TO HAVE
SOMETHING ON HER,
RAN WITH IT BIG
TIME, AND EVEN AFTER
THE GRAND JURY DROPPED
THE CASE BECAUSE
IT WAS NOT WARRANTED
AT ALL, THE BLACK PRESS
REALLY WASN'T THERE
THEN TO EAT THEIR WORDS
AND TAKE THIS BACK.
AND I THINK THAT SHE
FELT SOLD OUT BY HER OWN
AND THAT STARTED SHAKING
THE FOUNDATION OF HER
UNDERSTANDING AROUND
THIS COMMUNITY OF BLACKS.
OR IT COULD HAVE ALSO
SHOWED HER HOW DISTORTED
HER VIEW OF HERSELF
WAS THROUGH THEM,
AND IT STARTED
HER DOWNFALL IN
HER ABILITY TO
CONCENTRATE AND WORK.
HER SPIRIT WAS SHAKEN AT
THAT POINT AND SHE FOUND
IT DIFFICULT - ALTHOUGH
SHE DID CONTINUE TO WORK
SHE FOUND IT DIFFICULT.
AND THEN HER HEALTH
STARTED FAILING, I THINK,
RIGHT AROUND THAT AND
IT MIGHT HAVE BEEN
THE CONFLUENCE OF
THOSE TWO THINGS
THAT REALLY BROUGHT
HER DOWN TO THE END.
THE ACCUSATIONS HAD
BEEN EXPOSED AS FALSE,
BUT HER HUMILIATION
WAS ALL TOO REAL.
HER OWN COMMUNITY
HAD PERSECUTED HER.
SHE LEFT NEW YORK CITY
IN 1949, AND HEADED
FOR THE EMOTIONAL
AND PHYSICAL WARMTH
OF HER REMEMBERED SOUTH.
LIVING ON A FRIEND'S
BOAT IN MIAMI FOR A TIME,
SHE EARNED A FEW
DOLLARS HERE AND THERE
FROM HER WRITING.
BUT BY 1950, ALL BUT THE
MOST RECENT OF HER BOOKS,
"SERAPH ON THE SUWANEE",
WERE OUT OF PRINT.
MONEY WAS RUNNING SHORT.
ZORA CONTINUED WRITING
WHILE ACCEPTING EMPLOYMENT
AS A DOMESTIC IN THE HOME
OF A WEALTHY WHITE COUPLE.
IN MARCH 1950 THE SATURDAY
EVENING POST PUBLISHED
HER STORY "CONSCIENCE
OF THE COURT".
IT WAS ONLY THEN THAT HER
RICH RIVO ISLAND EMPLOYERS,
READING THE MAGAZINE,
RECOGNIZED HER NAME
AND REALIZED WHO WAS
WASHING THEIR WINDOWS.
WHEN THE MIAMI HERALD RAN
A STORY TITLED, IN PART,
"FAMOUS NEGRO AUTHOR
WORKING AS A MAID",
OFFERS OF FREELANCE
WRITING ASSIGNMENTS
BEGAN COMING IN,
AND ZORA HURSTON
MADE A LIVING FROM
WRITING ONCE MORE.
IN THE SUCCEEDING
YEARS SHE WORKED AS
A COURT REPORTER
COVERING A SENSATIONAL
FLORIDA MURDER TRIAL
FOR A PITTSBURGH
PENNSYLVANIA NEWSPAPER
AND AS A COLUMNIST
FOR THE FORT PIERCE,
FLORIDA "CHRONICLE,"
WHERE SHE CALLED UPON HER
ANTHROPOLOGICAL STUDIES
TO WRITE ON "HOODOO
AND BLACK MAGIC".
IN 1959 ZORA SUFFERED
A STROKE AND,
IN OCTOBER OF THAT
YEAR, ENTERED A
WELFARE HOME IN ST.
LUCIE COUNTY, FLORIDA.
THE HARLEM RENAISSANCE
HAD LONG SINCE ENDED,
A NEW AGE OF BLACK PRIDE
WAS ON THE HORIZON,
AND ZORA NEALE HURSTON
WAS ALL BUT FORGOTTEN.
EVEN HER
BEST-KNOWN WORK,
"THEIR EYES WERE WATCHING
GOD" WAS OUT OF PRINT.
NOT BECAUSE ITS LITERARY
VALUE HAD LESSENED
BUT BECAUSE ITS LITERARY
VENUE HAD CHANGED.
AFRICAN-AMERICAN LETTERS
NO LONGER HAD A PLACE FOR
HURSTON'S DEPICTION OF THE
SOUTHERN BLACKS SHE KNEW,
FOR HER HONEST AND, SOME
FELT, DEMEANING PORTRAIT
OF THEIR LANGUAGE, THEIR
CUSTOMS AND THEIR FOIBLES.
IN FACT, MUCH OF
WHAT HURSTON WROTE -
BOTH FICTION AND
ESSAY - STOOD IN STARK
PHILOSOPHICAL CONTRAST
TO HER CONTEMPORARIES.
SHE REGULARLY
CONTRIBUTED TO
AMERICAN LEGION MAGAZINE,
ARTICLES WITH SUCH TITLES
AS "WHY THE NEGRO
WON'T BUY COMMUNISM"
AND "I SAW NEGRO
VOTES PEDDLED".
SHE WAS A STAUNCH
CONSERVATIVE AMONG
AN OPENLY
LEFT-LEANING LOT.
ZORA'S VIEWS
ON RACE RELATIONS
DIFFERED FROM MOST
BLACKS IN GENERAL
AND SOUTHERN BLACKS IN
PARTICULAR OF THAT DAY
IN THAT SHE WAS
AGAINST INTEGRATION.
SHE DID NOT FEEL IT WOULD
IMPROVE THE CONDITION
OF BLACKS BY JUST MIXING
THEM IN WITH WHITES.
SHE THOUGHT THAT THE
CULTURAL UNIQUENESS
AND HERITAGE OF AFRICAN
DESCENDED PEOPLE
WOULD BE LOST IN THAT.
SO THE IDEA OF
STRIPPING ALL THAT OFF
AND ASSIMILATING TO
ELEVATE YOUR STATUS
WAS NOT AN OPTION AS
FAR AS SHE WAS CONCERNED.
SHE WANTED A MORE
PLURALIST APPROACH.
THAT THERE DIDN'T NEED TO
BE JUST ONE CULTURE THAT
WAS ELEVATED AND RESPECTED
AND ASSIMILATED TO,
SHE THOUGHT THAT THEY COULD
GO SHOULDER TO SHOULDER,
THAT THEY COULD SHARE
THE AMERICAN PALETTE.
SOME PEOPLE SAY THAT
HURSTON DISAPPEARED
BECAUSE SHE BECAME A
CONSERVATIVE REPUBLICAN.
SOME PEOPLE SAY SHE
DISAPPEARED BECAUSE SHE
EFFECTIVELY OPPOSED
BROWN V BOARD, THE FAMOUS
SUPREME COURT DECISION IN
1954 WHICH OSTENSIBLY LED
TO THE DESEGREGATION OF
SCHOOLS WHICH, OF COURSE,
IT DIDN'T, BUT IT
DID IN SOME PLACES
LIKE MY HOME TOWN
IN WEST VIRGINIA.
I THINK THAT HURSTON WAS
AWAITING A READERSHIP
TO SUSTAIN HER,
LIKE ANY WRITER.
SHE WAS WIDELY CELEBRATED,
WIDELY REVIEWED,
BUT RICHARD WRIGHT BY
PUBLISHING "NATIVE SON"
IN 1940 JUST CHANGED
THE LITERARY LANDSCAPE.
ZORA NEALE HURSTON
DIED OF "HYPERTENSIVE
HEART DISEASE"
ON JANUARY 28TH 1960,
AND WAS BURIED IN
FORT PIERCE, FLORIDA.
IT WOULD BE NEARLY
A GENERATION BEFORE
ANOTHER NOTED WRITER
OF COLOR, ALICE WALKER,
WOULD DISCOVER HURSTON'S
WORK AND HELP RETURN HER
TO THE SPOT IN
THE AMERICAN CANON
THAT SHE HAD SO
RIGHTLY EARNED.
IN MARCH 1975,
WALKER PUBLISHED
"IN SEARCH OF ZORA
NEALE HURSTON"
IN "MS." MAGAZINE.
HER ACCOUNT OF A PILGRIMAGE
TO HURSTON'S UNMARKED GRAVE
IS CREDITED WITH LAUNCHING
THE HURSTON REVIVAL.
IN A VARIETY OF WAYS
YOU CAN DRAW A LINE
BETWEEN HURSTON AND
THIS GENERATION OF
AFRICAN-AMERICAN
WOMEN WRITERS.
MANY OF THEM, SUCH
AS ALICE WALKER AND
"THE COLOR PURPLE",
ARE OBVIOUSLY REWRITING
"THEIR EYES
WERE WATCHING GOD".
THEY'RE ECHOING, THEY'RE
BORROWING FROM IT.
THEY'RE RIFFING ON IT,
THEY'RE STANDING ON
HURSTON'S SHOULDERS.
THAT'S HOW ANY LITERARY
TRADITION UNFOLDS.
IT'S ABOUT READING AND
REVISING ANTECEDENT TEXTS
OF THE TRADITION LIKE
LINKS IN A CHAIN.
IT'S SIGNIFYING.
IT'S RIFFING IN JAZZ.
SHE WAS DEFYING ALL SORTS
OF CONVENTION AND I THINK
SHE'S NOW BEING REWARDED
ALL THESE YEARS LATER.
"I KNOW THAT NOTHING
IS DESTRUCTIBLE;
THINGS MERELY
CHANGE FORMS.
WHEN THE CONSCIOUSNESS
OF LIFE CEAS,
I KNOW I SHALL BE PART
AND PARCEL OF THE WORLD.
WHY FEAR?
THE STUFF OF MY BEING IS
MATTER, EVER CHANGING,
EVER MOVING,
BUT NEVER LOST."
FOR A TIME, AMERICAN
LETTERS HAD LOST
ZORA NEALE HURSTON.
BUT NOW, WE HAVE
FOUND HER AGAIN.
"MY NAME IS ZORA
NEALE HURSTON
AND I'M GOING TO
SING A GAMBLING SONG.
* LET THE DEAL GO DOWN,
BOY, LET THE DEAL GO DOWN
(ANOTHER CARD FALLS
OFF THE DECK)
WHEN YOUR CARD
GET LUCKY, OHHHH,
LET THE DEAL GO DOWN,
BOY, LET THE DEAL GO DOWN
LET THE DEAL GO DOWN, BOY,
LET THE DEAL GO DOWN. *